Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Elena Zilioti. He's an
she is an assistant professor of ethics and political
philosophy at the Delft University of Technology, and she
is the author of the book we're going to
talk about today, Meritocratic democracy Across Cultural Political Theory.
So, Doctor Zilliotti, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to have you on.
Hi, Ricardo, thanks for having me here.
So, let me start by asking you perhaps a
general question. So, could you start, uh, could you
start by telling us maybe what is the premise
of your book and what are some of the
main questions that you set out to tackle there?
Yeah, um, so the premises of the book are,
um, primarily the fact that, uh, we live in
a global world, uh, is much more, uh, well
connected than before, and democracy is a global phenomenon,
and at the moment we have a significant data
that democracy that tells us that democracy is in
crisis, so there is a, a huge demand to
rethink and to discuss about democracy. And this is
a little bit the background, the premises of uh
the book, and then the book uh uh tries
to tackle uh some uh key fundamental questions both
at the methodological level and also the content level.
Um, WHEN it comes to math, the, partly because,
as I say, that one of the background assumption
is that we live in a, in a global
world, globalized world and democracy is a global phenomenon.
Uh, ONE key question is, uh, how can cross-cultural
debate help us to understand and even develop, uh,
uh, theories of government for contemporary times? Um, AND
so how we can use different sites from different,
uh, uh, intellectual traditions to think or rethink democracy.
At the content level then, uh, the book deals
with the, uh, three main fundamental questions. One is
the justification for democracy. Um, IS democracy, um, a
justifiable form of government today and if it's so,
why? And second, uh, what is the role or
the functions of uh uh democratic leaders in uh
uh democratic society. So, mm, political leaders in the
democratic system are one of the key, um, topics
of the book. And the third point is uh
concerning um whether democracy or how can democracy ensure
that political leaders work for democracy, not against it.
Mhm. And we're going to tackle all of those
questions here today, but before we get into that,
generally speaking, how is democracy approached in political science
and political philosophy? What does democracy mean exactly?
Yeah. So democracy means, as you expect by academic,
but scholars debate, democracy means different things to different
people and to complicate the story even more, that
situation is, is true even if you consider different
philosophers in different times. Um, BUT so there are
people who thinks of democracy in a way as
one person, one vote. Um, OTHER propose a more
um elaborated, I would say conception of democracy. They
emphasize, for example, uh, the, the importance of public
participation and political equality, uh, has key principle of
uh uh democratic government together also with the individual
rights. There are also contemporary debates that uh um
consider not so much the procedural element of democracy,
how democratic system work from a a procedural perspective
has a process of decision making, but rather has
a kind of uh um more instrumental approach to
democracy. So what we can. Uh, GET out of
democracy, what kinds of political output, uh, democracy can,
uh, develop. And uh here different scholars have elaborated
on the um the epistemic value of democracy. So
epistemic means knowledge primarily. So the, the possibility that
democratic system of governments, we are able to collect
the different insights on what political problems are in
our society and also different insights on how we
can develop better perspective on possible solutions to them.
So some people at the moment are emphasizing the
epistemic equality of democracies. DEMOCRACY is also a specific
kinds of government that is able to gather different
knowledge, different experience that is scattered around society. And
because it has these kinds of open or much
more open decision making process that alternative form of
governments is able under specific circumstances to define and
have higher chances to better define political issues and
also um provide a possible solutions to them.
So in the book, in order to tackle some
of the issues that we're going to talk about
that have to do with democracies and how they
work, some of their aspects, and then to bring
about meritocratic democracy. You bring to the table and
draw from both Western political theory and Confucian or
East Asian political theory. So, uh, just to introduce
them to the audience, what would you say are
some of the main aspects, the more important aspects
of each of them that you would say people
need to understand to then tackle the issues you
address
in the group. Yeah, um, so I would define
uh Confucian political theory and Western political theory has
two subfields of one academic field that is named
political theory. So this field offers um reflection on
key political concept and key political issues and attempts
to generate some action guidance so how we can
Better defined and also better deal with certain political
uh problems, but also what is the right thing
to do when it comes to certain political situations.
Now, uh Confucian political theories that's that subfield of
political theory that uh uh is connected to Confucianism,
that is one of the most ancient um tradition
in that or in the East Asian continent. It,
it started in, in China, it spread all around
East Asia and around the world. Um, AND so
you have, uh, uh, scholars, so political theories interested
in political questions that, uh, uh, are at the
same time connected uh and committed to, uh, Confucian
fundamental principles and values. And uh uh Western political
theory is a subfield of political theory, uh, primarily
I would say that uh is the biggest uh
subfield in political theory, and there are a lot
of discussions also that our field is too Western-centric,
so, uh, we tend to associate Western political theory
with political theory, but that's uh it's a mistake.
The political theory is much broader than just Western
political theory. But Western political theory is the political
theory that uh um is associated with the Western
intellectual traditions. So here we have philosophers that are
more, more connected with certain kinds of concepts and
ideas that have developed in the uh in Western
philosophy. And at the moment, uh, uh, I, uh,
you can see a very interesting debates uh happening
uh in Confucian political theory and the Western political
theory. So the book is uh focusing and connecting
on contemporary debates uh in uh Confucian and Western
political theories about democracy, so debates about democracy, because
at the moment you have each a discussion, uh,
on, in both these uh subfields of political theory,
primarily on uh uh democracy. In Confucian political theory,
um, you have a background of the so-called renaissance
of the East Asia. So East Asia has grown
significantly economically and uh um had this created a
very strong impact at the, at the social level,
cultural level. So there is a lot of discussions
among uh Confucian scholars on how we can Rethink
and whether we should rethink our political uh structures
and ideas given contemporary East Asian situation, given how
pluralistic, even how different we are from what uh
uh East Asian society were in the past. And
so you have uh uh a very interesting debate
in Confucian political theory between two groups, the so-called
Confucian political meritocrats and Confucian uh Democrats. So the
Confucian Democrats um are more inclined to a democratic
uh political uh future for East Asian society, so
they think that if Confucianism has to evolve and
should be uh should evolve, then it has to
um align and to find that we we have
to rethink Confucianism in a more democratic way. Uh,
THE Confucian political meritocrats are partly also endorsing, uh,
democracy, but they are also think that, uh, uh,
democracy has to be connected with a second principle
of governance, the idea of political meritocracy, and maybe
we can talk about it later. Um, THE Western
political theory is a very rich debate, but here
we also have two factions that are discussing about
democracy at the moment. There are some that are
quite skeptic about democracy. They are thinking that we
should, uh, uh, perhaps limit uh certain uh democratic
elements in our. Current political systems and and these
are the so-called epistocrats, so they think that from
an epistemic point of view, the quality of the
uh political outcome of democracy on average is too
low and so we have to rethink democracy. Well,
the so-called epistemic democrats are defending democracy on the
epistemic grounds, so they think that. Um, THERE are
good reasons to be disappointed with contemporary democratic, uh,
politics, and so they are not endorsing, uh, they
are not defending, uh, uh, contemporary democratic system. They
are equally disappointed with them, but they think that
the issue has, is that they are not sufficiently
democratic, so they are defending a democratic model, um,
in order to provide the kinds of new idea
for democratic innovations. So, uh, there was this synergy,
this connection between these two different debates, and, uh,
uh, the book tries to bring insights and ideas
into, uh, from these two different debates together in
order to generate a new theory of democracy.
Mhm. And so let's get into some of the
shortcomings of democracy that you tackle in the book
and then the, some of the potential solutions to
them. So, starting with political parties, what are some
of the main shortcomings that some people have pointed
to when, when it comes to How political parties
work in democratic systems.
Yeah, so there is a um interesting discussion on
the, the, the, the, the role and the shortcoming
of political parties in democracy and also the shortcomings
of this political agency primarily because political parties are
a crucial agency in a democratic system. Um, IT'S
not their, their function is not well, uh, captured
if you think of democracy as one person, one
vote, but, uh, mm, consider the fact that, uh,
um, um, most of the time, uh, it's impossible
for political leaders to be elected without a sort,
sort of political party that uh um give them
access to elections. So they play a kinds of
important uh bridging role between uh uh citizens and
government. But there are important shortcomings, as you say.
For example, the increasing influence of political leaders in
democratic politics that leads basically to the, the, the,
a much more limited power for political parties in
contemporary democratic society because if political leaders as they
have done, have gained unprecedented influence and power in
democratic politics. That means that the political party is
subjected to the will and the wishes of the
political leader because the political leader is basically calling
the shots is actually as much more influence on
the political party because the very existence of the
political party depends on the political leader. Um, AND
that creates a problem for the, the political party
because the, the space of maneuver, the, the, the
influence of the political party is, uh, is less.
Um, THE second point that is discussed, uh, um,
quite, uh, um, uh, prominently I will say that
in academic debates is the, um, so-called idea of
the cri the crisis of the so-called traditional political
ideologies. Um, AND this I think it's much more
relevant uh when it comes to uh political parties
on the left side of the political spectrum than
the right. Um, AND the discussion is the fact
that it concerns the fact that, uh, most parties
on the left, uh, um. HAVE lost appeal to
uh many uh voters primarily because they don't have
uh any more comprehensive and intriguing uh uh political
vision to sell to the voters. Um, Marxism, socialism.
Uh, THERE are still people who defend this, uh,
these views, obviously, but most of the pope, uh,
most of the voters, uh, are, um, not, uh,
um, endorsing these uh political visions that had a
huge influence decades ago. Um, AND so the question
is, what is the, the appeal? What is the,
the, the, the, the, the, how can, uh, political
parties, especially on the left, uh, really reach out,
uh, um, and motivate uh uh voters? Um, The
third point I would say is the discussions about
the loss of a stable electoral base, and I
think it's connected to the two points I mentioned,
the political leaders and also the crisis of traditional
political ideology. So now, as, as I think most
of us have experienced, um. Elections have become much
more dramatic because uh uh sometimes we are unable
to um make a correct hypothesis of where the
votes will go. So we can see that the
voters are much more inclined to, to change from
left to right or the other way around than
before, and this maybe it's also because we don't
have again strong traditional political ideologies that keep them
on one side. But that means also that uh
the um the electoral base is not as stable
as before and, and so that creates a lot
of instability um and undermines indirectly also the uh
the power and the influence of political parties.
Mhm. And so, uh, earlier when I asked you
about Confucian political theory and Western political theory, you
mentioned meritocracy. So, could you tell us now what
political meritocracy is, particularly in the context of Confucian
political theory?
Yes, sure. So, mm, me, what does, first we
can start with the concept of meritocracy. Meritocracy is,
um, usually considered a, a distributive principles, especially in
the Western, uh, tradition, right? It means that there
are certain kinds of goods. It can be, for
example, job positions that have to be distributed to
uh among multiple people, and we need a principle
that allows us to uh to distribute the certain
goals. So meritocracy is usually considered. One possible options
to do. How do we distribute job positions? What
is our criteria for example, individual skills or gender?
What is it? Meritocracy says, well, it's the merit,
so it's the uh um it's how, whether and
how people deserve that good. Uh, POLITICAL meritocracy is,
uh, you can consider it has the the application
of the meritocratic principle, uh, to, uh, politics, and
when I, I mean politics, uh, I mean the
uh legislature positions, positions in the legislative uh uh
chamber or um uh branch of government. So political
meritocracy argues that distributions of political power should be
done according to the merits, according to the qualities
of the persons. So if we have people that
are more competent, for example, more politically knowledgeable than
others, then maybe they should have more of that
kinds of good that we call political power. In
the Confucian debate, uh, um, political meritocracy, uh, is
considered to be an extension of, uh, one of,
uh, uh, or at least the, the, the defenders
of Confucian political meritocracy, argue that, uh, um, political
meritocracy is an extension um of the Confucian idea
that uh a virtuous persons uh have to be
um allowed, they have to be allowed to govern.
So elevating the world is one key fundamental principle
in Confucian political thought. And so the defenders of
political meritocracy see the idea of political meristocracy has
a contemporary way of rethinking the the ancient Confucian
idea of elevating the world. And so their approach
to political meritocracy is quite confusing. They say what
who is worth it of a superior political power?
Well, those first of all who are virtuous, so
and this is a fundamental element in Confucian political
thought. So it's not just about competence, political competence.
They also think it's also about character. It's about
virtue, so we need good people in government. But
the way it's set up then upsets those who
defend the full democracy because obviously um political meritocracy
ends up giving an unequal distribution of political power
and so that clashes with the very principle of
political equality, a fundamental principle in the democratic systems.
But I, I mean, you mentioned virtues there are
that a particular person has to be virtuous in
order for, for them to hold political power, for
example, according to Confucianism, but what kinds of virtues
are we talking about here?
Yeah, uh, so in the, in the Confucian tradition,
uh, there were multiple virtues that have been considered,
um, fundamental for good government, and, but the, the,
uh, the contemporary approaches to political meritocracy in, in
my perspective emphasize the fundamental uh Confucian virtue of
friend. Um, THEY may be not going to deter
to really defend the rand, but I think that
the essence of most of this theory is that
we need to find um political leaders that care
for the people, so uh that use their power
and influence for doing something that is good and
maybe we discuss whether. They can know, so there
is a, a group of uh uh leaders that
uh just know what is good for the people.
But the, the, the idea is that we need
some uh leaders that uh um what I argue
in the book that are public spirited. Um, SO
that they, they are using their influence and empower,
uh, to ensure that some collective project is realized
is pursued, so they are not using. Their influence
and power to um improve the conditions of their
family or their circle, for instance. So I think
this also shows some connections to the, the uh
tradition in Confucian political thought, but there is also
a bit of an element of novelty. So it's
a reconstruction of what virtue might mean today in
uh when it comes to political leaders.
So, uh, what do you think would be perhaps
the main shortcomings of political meritocracy, particularly of the
Confucian kind because we have to have uh the
the democratic element here. So what would you say
are the shortcomings of this approach?
Yeah, uh. There are usually 3 arguments that are
proposed against the Confucian political meritocracy. My argument in
the book is that even if we assume a
and that's how the book basically defends full democracy
versus Confucian political meritocracy is that even if we
assume an epistemic perspective, even if you assume. As
a uh Confucian political meritocrats that we need to
find a form of government that is able to
create something for the people, so, um, it's instrumentally
valuable and so that's where our focus is. Uh,
WE have a lot of discussion in the Western
debate that shows us that from an epistemic perspective,
uh, uh, democratic open decision making system can perform
better than a, a closer system. So a system
that gives a, a, a superior political power only
to a small group of virtuous people. So the,
the argument that is offered in, in the book
is that uh even if you care for the
well-being of the people, then there are higher chances
perhaps that a democratic open system can allow us
to identify much better the problems and the solutions
to achieve that goal. But this is not, uh,
I have to say it's not the only argument
on the table because Confucian Democrats before me have
offered other very interesting arguments. I just want to
mention uh 21, is the, uh, it's connected with
the idea of moral self-cultivation. Uh, SO in Confucianism.
Uh, MM, it's a very long, uh, it's a
very ancient, and complex tradition, so probably we should
talk about Confucianisms rather than just one Confucianism. But
uh there are key fundamental principles, uh, that the
most Confucian scholars, um, agree with, and one of
these is that the ultimate aim of life is
uh uh moral self-cultivation. And the, the ultimate aim
of government is also to allow people to achieve
this moral self-cultivation. Um, SO there have been some
confusion. Democrats like Toro and Stephen Engel that argued
that ultimately uh democratic system, um, is more valuable
for achieving moral for allowing people to achieve moral
self-cultivation than a a form of political meritocracy because
in their opinion, political participation is a way through
which we can uh improve as individual, as person.
We, uh, we are allowed to participate in political
discussions and therefore to, uh, grow, um, um, intellectually
and, uh, uh, possibly also morally. The second, uh,
uh argument that has been already put on the
table by Sugmund Kim uh concern, um, the problem
of pluralism. Uh, SO some, uh, uh, Confucian scholars
are concerned with the fact that, uh, East Asia
have changed quite a bit significantly in the past
decades. So they, uh, and if, uh, if we
consider South Korea, uh, uh, China, uh, for instance,
they, they cannot be considered the, the confusion. Societies
anymore. They are much more uh heterogenic um much
more uh pluralistic than what we can see from
outside, for example. Um, SO there is a uh
even Confucian political theorist, uh Kim argues have to
deal with the fact that, uh, uh, East Asia
is, uh, um, societies are pluralistic and so we
have to also to deal with the fact that
uh, um, nobody knows better than other what is
the. Uh, THE good, the, what is good for
the well-being of the people and perhaps. The final
word has to be given to the people themselves,
uh, even in an East Asian context. So these
I think are the three major uh arguments that
have been discussed, uh, against the political meristocracy in
the Confucian political theory debates.
Mhm. So tell us then about your theory of
meritocratic democracy and when it comes to democracy itself,
what are perhaps the merits of it that you
think are still worth defending?
Yeah, uh, one merit I think, uh, is the,
uh, is that, as I mentioned before, um, there
are good reasons to think that democracy does a
better job when it comes to pluralism than um
than a political meritocracy. And the second point that
I make in the, in the book is about
uh epistemic diversity. So I draw um from uh
uh the rich discussions in Western democratic theory about
epistemic democracy, um, to argue that an uh opening
the decision-making system to citizen participation can be actually
more instrumentally valuable than limiting uh political participation. Uh,
THIS is what, this is because knowledge and understandings,
uh, multiple forms of knowledge, sorry, and multiple formal
understanding are needed to identify and solve, uh, uh,
political problems that are very complex, um in a
contemporary democratic societies. And of course I think that
if somebody's reading the news about uh about democracy
in North America and in Europe that might sounds
not a very appealing argument to make nowadays. So
there might be some skeptic of democracy that might
smile and say, well, look at the situation, look
outside of your books around. How can you think
that democracy is a superior epistemic value. But uh
I would I would invite um my critics to
think how political discussion happen in democratic societies. So
most of the shortcomings and the issues that we
identify. With political uh agendas, proposals or political uh
uh or or possible policies is actually through open
discussions with the different, uh, even civic leaders, um,
participating in the discussion, uh protest by uh uh
by students. So there is much more, uh, shared
uh um there is much more, I would say,
uh, political knowledge dispersed around societies that are Yeah,
come to the fore I would say, and that
allows us to really understand what is going on
and where, where are the problems and how we
can solve them. The second thing that I would
like to stress is that uh um You, you
can defend the, the epistemic value of democracy, but
at the same time being very disappointed with real
world democratic institutions. Um, YOU can argue that these
democratic institution uh fell short of achieving your aims.
So the discussion is not whether, for example, defending
uh US democracy or not because we already have
since one decade. Um, POLITICAL scientists telling that uh
the US for instance is transiting more towards an
oligarchy than a democracy and actually some scientists say
that the US is an oligarchy. So the, uh,
the, uh, I think that we should, yeah, consider
that there are philosophical defense of democracy and that
um that are not necessarily connected to defenses of
uh real world democratic institutions, but they are more
interested in finding. Um, DEMOCRATIC, uh, solutions to, uh,
to improve, uh, real, uh, world democratic institutions.
Mhm. And I mean, when it comes to political
leaders, what are the functions of political leaders in
democratic systems and do you think that democratic theorists
should reframe the way we think about them and
their role in the political system?
Yeah, so the, the, the book argues that we,
we need full democracy, but at the same time
it would be stupid on my side to say
that everything looks good, so we need to also
consider and think hard to understand how we can
improve democracy. And the Confucian approach, the Confucian perspective
is used to point to one gap in contemporary
Western democratic theory about the function of political leaders
in a democracy. So it's quite surprising that in
my opinion that contemporary democratic societies are dominated by
political leaders. I think and that this is quite
obvious if you think that how much do we
know about democratic societies around the world we are
perfectly able to name the main political leaders in
India, in Argentina, and so on and so forth,
but we don't know the name of their political
parties, so it's really leader-centered democracy that we are
experiencing around the world. But that means also that
we need a political theory that deals with this
problem. So this, the uh the um uh significant
um power that political leaders have um achieved um
in contemporary democratic societies. And Confucianism traditionally had paid
a lot of attention about the role of political
leaders in politics. So this is the connection that
the books makes between Western democratic theory and the
Confucian political theories that uh there is so much
that we can, so much we can learn um
uh from uh Confucian political theory when it comes
to political leaders and so the, the, um, and,
and that can be actually very beneficial for those
working on democracy in Western political theory. And in
the book, I make uh two identify three fundamental
functions of political leaders in democracy. So, um, first,
I argue that uh um even from an epistemic
perspective, um, uh, political leaders play a key fundamental
role in a democratic system. First, they are a
motivational force. So some people argue that uh the
average voter uh is uh um is not so
much interested in politics um but actually this is
not true because the political leaders has, has, I
think, uh, recent elections in In the uh in
the US have shown are able to mobilize uh
different kinds of voters, so they play a motivational
function that can be good, it can be worst,
uh, it can be and can be bad, I
would say, but it, it, we have to accept
that this is also a very important element for
a democratic system that is based on public participation.
So political leaders are able to inspire. Uh, THEIR
followers and also bring maybe to the to to
votes and to protest those who disagree with them.
So are a very key engine when it comes
to political motivation. The second element is that they
are um uh. Also important when it comes to
political imagination. They are able to develop political visions
and because they are also most of the time
successful political leaders also extremely charismatic, they are able
to mobilize first function people behind their uh their
political vision. It can be bad and worse. Good
example, Nelson Mandela, for example. Um, THE third point
is uh is about political leaders that occupy. Uh,
SPECIFIC, uh, um, official positions in, uh, democratic institutions.
Um, THE political leaders, uh, have the possibility to,
um, to choose what kinds of expert opinion has
to be prioritized, um, when, uh, experts disagree. And
this is something that we saw, uh, I think
in multiple parts of the world uh during COVID,
where scientists and experts really had the, uh, strong
disagreements on what was the right thing to do
concerning uh social distances and masks and wearing of
mask. So we, we could see really that the
political leaders chose to prefer 11 options uh among
all those that were offered by the experts and
that led to very different kinds of consequences implications
around the world. So, uh, even this uh third
function, especially when it comes to emergency situation, is
fundamental in political leaders. Um, SO the book identifies
three fundamental functions that the, that political leaders, uh,
play in democracy and then reflects on how we
can ensure that political leaders, uh, use these functions
well, so that you, uh, that, uh, use this,
uh, that uh play these roles uh to ensure
a better democratic society rather than make it worse.
OK, and how would that work? How can we
ensure the quality of our political leaders and that
they really do work toward those goals and toward
democratic goals more generally? Yeah,
so here, again, I, I think uh at the
uh Confucian traditions and the debates that uh my,
my colleague in the con in working in Confucian
political theory are having at the moment. Um, I
go back to the fundamental idea that I mentioned
before, so, uh, that, that, uh, mm. In the
in the Confucian tradition, uh, the fundamental virtue for
good leaders is called Ren, often translated as benevolence
or humanities, is the, um, is the virtue of
that is the ability to care for others, for
the ability to care for others self moral self-cultivation.
And in the, in the book, I argue that
this is a very important leader virtue in Confucianism,
but it might be too, too thick for contemporary
pluralistic society because not all citizens agree that the
Confucian moral self-cultivation path is the right one. So
I say, well, this doesn't mean that we have
to discard completely the Confucian lesson, but there must,
there can be something interesting. So why Confucian scholars
believe that people with RAND are worth occupy, should
occupy leadership positions. And the answer to this question
in my book is twofold. On one hand, I
think that a Confucian scholar believes that a person
with RAND is a person that wants to direct
that use their influence and power to realize a
collective project. And the second part of the answer
is that among all the collective projects, the Confucians
might choose a Confucian project. Uh, SO the moral
self-cultivation of the people has the Confucian, uh, think
self-cultivation. So the book say, well, the second part
of the answer, the Confucian answer is problematic. But
the first one is not, so it would be
very difficult, even a polarized democratic society to find
somebody that says no political leaders shouldn't pursue a
collective project. They should use their power and influence
for their own family and circles. So I say,
Well, maybe then RAND is too thick, but the
first part is connected to the idea of public
spiritedness. So we need and public spirit seems to
be a neutral virtue. So whether you are leaning
on the left or right side of the political
spectrum, we both, we all want to have public
spirited leaders. We just disagree on who public, who
is public spirited. Yeah. So short example, I think
there is, for example, a very controversial political leader,
Donald Trump. I, I think that the, the, the
supporter of Donald Trump believes that he's one of
the few public-spirited uh leaders. So, and obviously the,
the, the critics think otherwise, but that means that
we agree at the very least that we need
public-spirited leaders. Uh, THERE, this huge disagreement who is
and whether Donald Trump is public spirited. But so
pub uh, public spirit becomes the basically foundation, uh,
fundamental virtue, uh, to reconceptualize a good political leaders,
leadership for a contemporary society.
And uh I mean in the book you also
talk about meritocratic screening. So what, what would, what
would that be and how would they work
exactly? Yeah. So, if, if you agree with the
idea that we need political leaders that are public
spirited, and this is a basic fundamental virtue for
any sorts of political leaders in, in uh uh
that has to enter politics. And then the question
is how do you make it possible, so how
can we ensure that you have a More public
spirited leaders than before, or at least how can
we ensure that we can really avoid it not
very public spirited uh or the bad toxic political
leaders and so the book engages with this more
practical question because I thought that without trying to
attempt to answer it's a very difficult question, but
I thought I should give it a try. I
should try at least to propose one option and
hopefully. The debate will pick it up and we
can find a solution together. But um, so the,
the, the idea of screening comes from the bit
of public spirited how we can ensure more public
spirited leaders and also to the idea that we
can rethink political meritocracy. So political meritocracy is criticized
in the first part of the book has a
kind of a principle of governance versus democracy. But
um this doesn't mean that we cannot rethink political
meritocracy, so the very idea that we need to
select uh virtuous political leaders in a way that
uh um uh strengthen democracy. So the, mm, so
I rethink the idea of uh um mm political
leaders selection in a way that can be uh
used uh and implemented in a democratic uh decision
uh making system. And this is how I come,
uh, I came up with the idea of a
pre-selection of political leaders. um, SO we can think
of ensuring more public spirited leader at the, uh,
by developing a pre-selection of political leaders at the
party level. Um, IF you think of, uh, uh,
the selection of political leaders in contemporary democracies, yes,
you have, uh, uh, the national level elections, um,
but these political leaders are put forward by, uh,
political parties and at political parties level you have
most of the time primaries, uh, uh, or, uh,
so internal decision, uh, mm uh internal selection system,
sorry. But what if you uh include the meritocratic
screenings of political leaders even before the primaries start?
So I mean, who selects who chooses the political
leaders that are going to run in the primaries.
Most of the time are the political party leads.
ARE not the partisans. Um, AND the partisans have
a say in the primaries. There are a lot
of also academics at the moment that are thinking
that primaries are not enough. We, we need more
deliberative uh decision process inside the parties and I'm
uh supporting that in the book. But I say,
hey, maybe we can also include that that uh
before primary start, before the liberation starts in the
political parties, a meritocratic screening that ensures that uh
A check, uh, a check on the uh public
spirits of the political leaders, and you don't have
to do it, uh, uh, through exams so for
example, or recommendation system has a Confucian political meritocrats
have proposed when it comes to their models, but
you can think of, uh, uh, for example, setting
up, setting up the, the argument argues, the book
argues that um uh party juries. So you can
select the, uh, you can create a party juries
within the political parties that have the um um
objective of uh um check the public spiritedness, uh
uh the quality or the public spiritedness of the
political leaders that wants to run, uh, in the
primaries. And so, uh, in this way, I think
uh you have an interesting way of combining meritocracy,
um, within a democratic uh system. And hence the
title uh meritocratic democracy.
Right, but I mean, in practice, of course, we've
already talked a little bit about that here, but
what would characterize meritocratic democracy and how would it
work? Uh, I mean, what are the main ways
by which, for example, just for people to, to
gather better understanding of how it would work? What
are the main ways by which it would differ
from current democratic systems?
Yeah, I think the, the main way that I
propose in the book is what um what we're
just mentioning is a meritocratic preselection system of political
leaders at the party level. I think this would
be the key element to have some meritocracy, meritocracy
injected in democracy well without limiting uh political equality.
So this, uh, and that, that's why I, uh,
the book is a form of meritocratic democracy, but
not a form of uh democratic meritocracy. And this
was the definition that Daniel Bell gave uh to
his uh uh very important and famous book, the
China Model. Uh, SO he, he argues that it's
a democratic meritocracy, um. Well, uh, in, in practice,
I think that we have a meritocratic democracy when
uh um meritocracy has a political merito meritocrats argue
is used uh uh to uh influence uh the,
the, the, the, the, the, the, the results of
who is gonna be the future leaders, political leaders,
but at the same time it does that without
undermining political equality, without undermining democratic institutions. So I
think the advantage is to use uh that meritocratic
democracy has is that it, it, it rethinks uh
political meritocracy in a way that it can strengthen
or it aims to strengthen, uh democracy. Of course,
this is, uh, becomes uh a Mm, my proposal
is, uh, is a practical proposal and, uh, uh,
has, uh, and I'm, I'm I'm a philosopher, so
I'm going a little bit beyond my comfort zone,
but, uh, in the book, I invite political scientists
to, uh, to tell us more whether this can
work, whether it can be tested primarily because the
book is a philosophy book, so it does, uh,
the, the job of, uh, of justify, justifying. Uh,
THIS proposal from a philosophical perspective, but if it's
uh philosophically sound, that means that we need also
more, uh, testing, more empirical analysis that help us
to understand how this proposal can be put into
place and how and what under what condition can
work or not.
Mhm. So, I have one final question then, and
it is more of a general question. So, of
course, as we talked about here in the book,
you bring together two different poli uh two different
traditions in political theory, namely Western political theory and
Confucian political theory or East Asian political theory. So,
how do you look at the value of cross
cultural political debates?
Yeah, I, I think the value is, uh, is,
uh, um, is immense. It, it has a great
value and I think, um, it would be very
difficult to reflect on politics uh without it. So
I think cross-cultural debates and engagement that need to
be more um in order to understand that this
global and complex uh world. So, um, my hope
is uh also to, to give an example on
how cross-cultural debates can also go beyond the methodological
discussions and also To give an example of a
cross-cultural theory. So not a theory of, uh, a
cross-cultural methodology, but a cross-cultural, uh, political theory, so
that uh um we can see more of these
uh kinds of uh uh hybrid theories um in
the, in the, in the debate. And I think
that, that's quite a um. That would be great
to see because at the moment I think there
is much more uh Awareness of uh the importance
of cross-cultural debates. There are a lot of discussions,
uh um in academia, for example, or how we
uh to decolonize our curriculum and how we can
um make academia, um, especially the humanities uh uh
less Western-centric. Um, SO I think there is a
um a, a large group of academics that uh
wants uh things to change. Um, WE are still
discussing, uh, in, uh, in, in philosophy department how
this can be done. Uh, SO academia is a
bit of a conservative, uh, um, space, and so
it takes a lot, a little bit of time
for things to change, but I think there is
uh. Um, THERE are many people who are looking
around and think, OK, what, how we can change
things, and especially students are, I would say most
of the time behind uh these uh these reasons
to change so that we have students that are
much more open to cross-cultural debates, um, and so
that I think, um, I hope that uh this
book will resonate with some of the interest of
some of, some of them.
Great. So the book is again meritocratic democracy Across
Cultural Political Theory, and of course, I'm leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview.
And Doctor Resiliotti, just before we go, apart from
the book, uh, would you like to mention any
places on the internet where people can find your
work?
Yeah, um, I have a website, um, Elenazilioti.com, and,
uh, and there, uh, I try to keep it
updated with all my new publications and the news
about conferences and talks, so that I think that
would be a good place to go if you're
interested in hearing more about this.
Great. So, Doctor Zulotti, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show and
for the very informative and interesting conversation.
Thanks to you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Jonathan Lays and the Samuel Curriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.